I'm sure you've been asked before and I probably know the answers to them myself, but maybe
a lot of the listeners in the radio show won't, so you know, just put up with that I guess.
Oh, sure, yeah.
I'm well used to that.
Yeah, I'm sure.
Tell me your front name again.
Darrell.
Yeah, Darrell.
Okay.
I'm an English teacher here at Odessa College.
Right.
Okay, listen, you obviously had an extremely varied background and I wondered if you could
just say a few words about how you began as a writer.
Okay.
I began to write when I was an able seaman in the Virgin Mary and how that came about
was that I left college before I graduated from high school.
It's a fascinating thing.
I lectured at colleges and universities all over the United States and in England and in
France and I have yet to get my high school diploma.
Someday, somebody will grant me an honorary high school diploma.
But anyway, I was on the ship and you had a lot of time to read and I conceived the idea
of an absolutely foolproof crime that would net me thousands and thousands of dollars.
And I even did research on it.
And as I was on the coast wise tanker and as I was going up and down the coast, when
we stopped at a port, I would send off a letter to the railroad so it was one of those things
that was involved and the insurance companies, that was another in the post office that was
selling out.
I got all my research done as to how to commit this particular kind of robbery.
And they let it carefully written so that nobody would know what I was up to.
And when I had all my material, I found that I did not have the immoral courage to commit
the crime.
So I wrote it as a story.
This was way back in the late 30s.
And I sent my story off to a newspaper syndicate.
I did not know anything about writing particularly and they were buying 1500 word short stories
that they published every day in the syndicate.
And when I got up to New York in the ship, to my amazement, I got a letter of acceptance.
And so I quit the sea and came ashore to be a writer.
And I got my money not on acceptance but on publication and it was five whole dollars.
And they would buy one and sometimes two stories a week but no more.
And so four and a half months or so, I lived on five and sometimes ten dollars a week.
My room cost me seven and whatever I saved I could eat.
And I learned a lot about being hungry and how to...
Did you ever notice that the counter cake has no crust on the end?
What they do is chop them off and they sell them in their day old store.
And at that time you could get a whole shopping bag full of cake ends for a nickel.
And I used to live on that.
One time I got a whole shopping bag full and it was moldy but I ate it anyhow and I was
so sick I didn't eat for three days and so I saved myself some money.
You know, I was like that.
It was a hard school.
It really was.
It was hard.
But then I finally, after some months of that, and I think I went back to sea for a short
while, I finally met John Campbell in 1939, early 1939.
He was the editor of astounding science fiction and a wonderful fantasy magazine called Unknown.
And so I started writing for him and then after that it just exploded.
One time I had four stories on the stands at the same time and those two magazines I
had to get two new names.
So it was an interesting beginning.
Okay, excellent.
Now you've done a lot of writing for the pulp but I don't think anybody would categorize
you as a pulp writer.
Well, you know, this is difficult with a, this is difficult with a whole matter of
categorization anyway.
We're in the grip of the taxonomist and people who put labels on things and stick them into
cubby holes.
Taxonomy has its uses.
There's no question about that.
You have to be able to find and retrieve information and that's what taxonomy is all about.
But more and more there seems to come over our whole culture.
The idea that if you can put a label on it you understand it and that is not what taxonomy
is for.
Taxonomy is handles by which you can pick something up and look at it.
But for so many people in so many ways the label is sufficient.
You know, he's a Republican.
He's whether with a Q or yeah, he's a poet, he's an S-beach or whatever.
They're all labels and just a little effort made to understand what's under these labels.
Pulp fiction has suffered from the same thing.
Pulp actually referred to the kind of paper it was printed on, not to its quality.
There was the pulps and there were the slicks.
The slicks from magazines like this Saturday evening, Post and Collier's and the home journal.
And the pulps were things like black masks and air war stories and science fiction and
fantasy and the like.
But it's so easy for the taxonomists and for people who don't pay proper attention to what
was going on to feel that pulp was a qualitative comment and slick was also qualitative.
Slicked paper was better literature than pulp paper.
Some of the finest writing around is some of the best pulp writers as such.
I mean the best writers of the time began in pulp and they only gravitated to the slicks
not because they got better but because they got paid more.
Red Ratbury is a perfect example of that.
There was Dashiell Hammett and the like.
Why do you think that you never became more...
I know you've written mainstream fiction, I know you don't like categories either, but
I wondered why you're mainly noted a lot of your writing in science fiction fantasy rather
than mainstream.
Well, first of all because I love the field because it's the only genre which has no limitations
whatsoever.
A lot of people there, the taxonomists are into it again.
They feel that science fiction is the literature of the future and of space, which is nonsense.
It's true that a lot of it is, but you can write science fiction about the past.
You can write science fiction about that marvelous place called other, just some other place that
doesn't have any reference to where we go in the future.
That's the best kind, that's the kind that I think one of the things that science fiction
is for.
If you don't like the government, go ahead and create a new kind of government.
Give it a push and see how it works.
You can study whole cultures and religions and also literature and art.
I've gone into that in some of my stories, which are essentially in places that occur
just other, not in the future or in the past necessarily.
One of the very finest science fiction books around is by somebody I'm very proud to call
one of my ex-students.
It's called Wild Seed.
It's by Octavia Butler.
It begins somewhere around the 17th century and goes up to about 1910, which is highly
future fiction.
It's a totally original structure, original idea and beautifully, beautifully written.
That lady is tremendous.
She really is.
One of the big ones.
Yeah, I know that book.
She is very good.
Yeah.
Listen, in the late 30s and through the 40s, did you have any contact with other science
fiction writers?
Was there any sense of community or groupings or anything like that?
Oh, sure.
I am characteristically not a joiner as such.
There was a group called the Hydro Club, which was completely informal.
The rule one was that there are no rules for this organization.
An awful lot of people belong to the Hydro Club.
Through that in the early years, I got to know all sorts of people like Harz Gold and
Fred Pol and Henry Kutner and so on.
Well, the whole raft with those early writers, I think I knew them all.
And there was a group there, Fred Pol was written about.
They were called the Puterians.
I was never involved in that particularly.
I attended the very first Milford Science Fiction Writers Conference in Milford, New
Jersey.
I guess that was in 1951.
And Judith Merrill, I was very close to.
Well, I knew virtually everybody in the field at that time except one or two of the West
Coast people.
Okay, one sort of general question on your style.
You, you, many of your stories have different kinds of style.
And I wonder if you experiment deliberately or is it something that comes naturally to
you?
It's absolutely deliberate.
The creation of a style, you can go a long way in the literary business.
Steinbett did it all this time.
And I'm not sure if you've ever actually did it.
One of the stunning examples is Ray Bradbury.
But you develop a style and then you stick to it.
Pretty soon you become imitable.
That is to say, anybody with any real facility with words can sit down and write a pure paragraph
of Steinbett.
Or for that matter Hemingway.
To imitate Hemingway and Steinbett is very, very easy.
And Bradbury particularly is extremely easy to imitate.
But you don't imitate Samuel Delaney, for example.
You don't imitate, I mean, not by the paragraph.
I'm not saying that you can sit down and write a Bradbury story or a Hemingway story.
That's a different matter.
But you were talking just about the matter of style.
And yes, it's a very conscious effort on my part to be able to write with facility in
any of a number of styles.
And sometimes the first person's stories, and I write out of the mouth of the person who's talking.
And not everybody talks in a high literary style.
That's what I fought Aldous Huxley for mostly.
You read an Aldous Huxley novel and Aldous Huxley talks like Aldous Huxley.
And old men talk like Aldous Huxley.
And little girls talk like Aldous Huxley.
It's a monotone.
All the words come out of all the mouths with the same kind of cadence.
And I don't consider this really top writing.
Why I admire Delaney so much is that when he talks ghetto black, it is for real.
But if he has two characters discussing modern American poetry,
they talk in the terms of William Carlos Williams or T.S. Eliot.
And he knows, he's got a good ear.
He knows the cadence of this kind of writing.
And I admire that so very much.
That you can't imitate.
And so I consciously do that.
Okay. James Gunn has written that because of Sturge and other writers have been free
or to write what they wish to write and able to find a market for it.
And I wondered if you were conscious of yourself as having that kind of a role?
Not at all. Not at all.
I tell you, the last few years have been real revelations to me.
For one thing, I didn't realize that I had had so much personal impact on people.
Until what was it, six years or so?
Now, I went to Italy and a woman came up to me dragging an interpreter.
And the interpreter said, she doesn't speak any English,
but there are two things that she wants to tell you.
One of them is that you write women better than any writer she knows.
And the other thing is that because of something that you wrote,
she did not kill herself one night.
And the woman began to cry and the interpreter began to cry and I began to cry.
And it was quite an experience.
I suddenly realized that what I have done, apparently,
I've been able to reach a great many people far deeper than I had any idea that I was doing.
When I look back over the mail that I've gotten over the years,
I realize how many people in how many different ways have told me that same kind of thing.
It's extremely gratifying. It's also a little frightening.
I mean, it's frightening enough to make you terrified or touching your typewriter.
What's his name?
Not Lafferty.
I'm sorry, I have to stop a minute and think about Barry Malzburg.
Wrote a fascinating book called Engines of the Night.
And I have a quote from it here that somebody's ear rocks for me and sent to me.
And he said, the most important science fiction writer of the 40s was probably Theodore Sturgeon.
He said he was not the best or the most significant,
nor did he make the most fundamental impression, even as a stylist, the basis of his reputation.
He might have fallen behind a cuteness in top form,
but what Sturgeon did was to keep open the possibility for a kind of science fiction that eventually many others came to, too.
Which in itself is very gratifying.
He says Sturgeon's contribution was unique in his use of style, internalization and quirky characterization.
He was keeping the door open for everything that happened after 1950,
when the gold voucher in the 50s perspective became the alternative that dominated the field.
If he had not been around for this decade to hold the flags of this kind of science fiction,
had not established that the literature could be style-oriented,
it is possible that the 50s perspective would not have developed.
The editors and potential audience might have been there,
but no basis would have been existed upon which writers within the field could build.
It's so gratifying to read a thing like that, you know, years after the fact.
Maltsberg never told me that he was writing that in an essay, and I came on it quite by accident.
But apparently that was the case, and I'll tell you quickly a story.
A few years ago, there was a little boy who went to see his buddy, he was six or seven years old.
His mother told him back to me back before dark.
And he was so busy playing with his friend that he looked out the window and saw it was dark.
And he went rushing home, and like little kids will, he dragged his stick along a picket fence,
and when he got to the corner, he whined it against the lamppost.
And immediately all the lights in the northeastern United States went out.
Remember that one, that big blackout?
He went rushing home to his mother, weeping, and threw himself into her arms,
and said, God, mommy, I didn't mean it, I didn't mean it.
Well, this is the way I felt when I first read things like this.
Very gratifying, and very surprising to me.
You know, I did not do that on purpose.
I was like, God, mommy, I didn't mean it.
Yeah, a lot of critics that I've read feel that same way.
That's pretty universal opinion.
In relation to that, a number of critics and authors also identify you as sort of a shatterer of taboos,
some of the themes that you wrote about just hadn't been handled in science fiction before.
Yeah, that's right. That I've done on purpose.
You can stand by for a coffee.
Coffee's over.
Yes, I have purposely broken taboos, and you know, I wrote the first stories in science fiction
about homosexuality, for example, which dealt with homosexuality, and with incest.
And I had a three-prider in omnilist last year, which dealt with cannibalism.
But these stories were not about homosexuality, and about incest, and about cannibalism.
Essentially, they were about confrontation.
All my life I've been infuriated by people who shuck away from an idea.
I don't want to hear about that.
Oh, don't tell me that. I don't want to hear it.
You know, oh, it angers me.
Because only by confrontation can we really learn anything.
The whole history of, well, a subject like masturbation, for example,
which absolutely terrified the three or four generations before mine,
and preoccupied them too.
The inventor of one of our more famous breakfast foods, he was a nutritional doctor,
and he used to write dietary and medical advice books for the home.
And about 75% of them has to do with masturbation,
and how it will make your hair fall out and give you a softening of the brain
and tuberculosis and cancer and all kinds of things.
Nowadays, with a little confrontation and a little research and study,
you can read in the highest level of women's magazines
not only how to do it, but how to do it well.
And it's become a totally accepted practice.
But the horror that went on, because people would not confront it,
or would not find out what the truth was, caused so much frightful damage.
I mean, people committed suicide over that.
I had a relative whose whole life was absolutely made ill by history and occupation with that.
To be tempted and finitely healed, and then feel guilty and feel guilty,
and so guilty that he would never tell anybody about it.
It'd wrecked his whole life.
That was a lot of years ago, in the past generation, but it's an example of what I mean.
Now, people have got to confront.
If we meet, you'll probably see me wearing a little silver medallion.
It's a letter to it without an arrow through it.
It's my trademark.
And what it means is, ask the next question.
To me, it's the symbol of everything that humanity has ever created.
And it's the only way it has been created by people asking the next question, the one that follows.
And so often people ask the next question, the one that follows, and the one that follows,
until they suddenly come to a question, they don't want to ask because they're afraid they might get the answer.
And there they stop.
And then when you stop asking the next question, you die.
You become a zombie.
And join the ranks of the zombies you see marching around you.
Where I've stopped asking the next question.
It's a very symbol of life and of progress and of science and everything toward basic truth.
When you ever reach basic truth, you'll find not a thing or a precept, but you'll find a process.
You'll find something going on.
And this is the way I've been thinking, apparently, all my life.
I get very, very irritated when I find that people refuse to think beyond a certain point.
There's a bumper sticker that goes around in the Bible Belt.
God said it. I believe it. That settled it.
When you see a bumper sticker like that, you just hear the crash of a closing mind.
There's plenty of room out there to confront the whole idea of God and to go on with it.
And ask the next question and the question that follows without committing any particular kind of sin.
Excellent. That's very good.
I'm in the middle of the Bible Belt out here in Odessa. I know exactly what you mean, those kind of people.
Isn't that a great bumper sticker?
Yeah.
God said it. I believe it. That's settled it.
Yeah, okay.
Let me ask a couple questions about some of your particular works.
The book Venus Plus X, which I guess was published in 1960, I suppose the impetus behind that was the sexual stereotyping in our society.
Because that's right. That came about by her's leafy through a magazine.
And I saw an ad for a whole thing's tire chain. Weed tire chains.
And there was a photograph of a girl in her underwear holding on a tire chain.
And it stopped me cold. I said, what on earth has that got to do with a tire chain?
Clearly, you know, it was a grabber by the advertising business that made me stop and look at the ad.
But what has to go with the clothes I've got to do with a tire chain?
And I began to think, what kind of a civilization?
What would it be like to live in a culture where there's no particular sexual bias at all?
And so I started, first of all, creating a society in which there was no sexual at all.
That people were, they generated like oysters, which can be both either male or female.
But at the beginning, they're neither. And I couldn't make that work.
So I went in another direction and created a race of people.
And each individual was both sexes.
And therefore there was no sexual differentiation. They were just people.
And it got into their love and marriage, their sexuality, also into their art, their literature, their architecture.
And so, and I had a ball with that.
Venus plus sex is not really a novel at all. It's a tract.
It's an exposition of the ideas that I was getting at the time.
Yeah, you wouldn't necessarily advocate the kind of surgical alteration in that book.
No, by no means.
I have to be careful of that. When an author comes out with a rather radical notion,
it's very easy to assume that he's promoting that.
Heinlein, for example, got a lot of rocks thrown at him for Starship Cooper,
because they felt that that was particularly the kind of military he advocates.
It's not, not really. He has a military background. It's perfectly true.
Which made his description of the Starship Cooper seem very real, and that he was promoting it.
He also has a reputation for being a male chauvinist pig.
However, I know the man extremely well. I know that that could be the least occasion.
He's the only married man I've ever seen who always rises to his feet when his wife comes into the room.
In the Notebooks of Lazarus Long, there are several items similar to Page Long and so only a paragraph or a sentence.
But the very shortest one in the Notebooks of Lazarus Long could not possibly have been written by a male chauvinist pig.
In order to rub her feet.
Okay. Would you say that more than human is probably your best known work? Is that the one you get the most response?
I would say so. And when I sold Finnish and Israeli rights two years ago, it got into its 15th and 16th languages.
And just how many editions? I have no idea. Genuinely not.
I know there are five or six English editions and several Spanish and a number of French and four Japanese editions.
I think I'm proud of all of that. If a novel can pass the language barrier and the cultural barrier and go into more editions, then I think that's a real achievement.
The French now have film rights and it's in the works now to be a film finally after all these years.
We had a really superb director, but through various machinations he has dropped out so I don't know exactly who is going to direct it at this point.
The script is written by me and by Jane Tannehill, my lady Jane, my wife, who is a superb script writer.
Well, she's a very loaded lady. She really is. Tremendous person.
She is at the moment down at the metaphysical center where she's running a seminar on the tarot.
She will be ordained a minister in the American Holistic Church next July.
She completed all last season with the San Diego Symphony Orchestra and the master chorale.
She's a chorale singer and a composer and a musician and a born teacher.
She's also an established science fiction writer. She's an old analog and amazing and chrysalis.
As I say, a very, very accomplished person. As a script writer, she's really splendid.
It was a joy to work with her and I don't work easily with other people, but we wrote a very fine script for more than human.
I suspect there will be more coming up of that, or collaborating on screenplays.
That's good. I'm happy to hear that about the movie.
Of course, I guess that was the original story there was in Baby Makes Three.
I wonder why it made you... What made you add the other two to that?
The springboard for that was in a book by Pearl Buck, which was called The Vision of Women.
I read it so many years ago that I hardly remember the book at all.
But there was one passage in there which described a monk who took care of some children in a cave in the woods.
They were uneducated and wild children that had died without him.
He was just an impoverished monk himself, and he took care of these raggedy little children.
That image always stayed with me.
Somehow that and the whole idea of what would happen if each of these children, coming from various places
and being various kinds of children, had very special ESP talents.
Again, it was a question of investigating what the impact would be on the world as a whole,
as some of the newly recognized propitivities of the human mind came up.
This, of course, is... There are literally thousands of books that have been written on that theme since then.
Of course, the people in that book is in so many of your other stories and novels, I think, are sort of misfits.
I wondered why you picked that kind of character so often.
Well, I think a misfit has a chance to be objective.
For one thing, he sees society as a whole from its underbelly or from way off at one side.
Essentially, it's not so much misfits.
The key to what I write, I think, is loneliness.
I learned early that you can write about excitement, you can write about adventure, you can write love and sex and so on.
And basically, in each case, you don't hit too many people, but if you write about loneliness, everybody's an expert.
I'm fond of saying that if you know some guy who collects pheasant feathers, and that's his whole preoccupation,
and you write a story that involves pheasant feathers, and you know what you're talking about, he's going to love it.
But the incidence of people in the general population who collect pheasant feathers is very small.
But the point is that because you wrote to an expert of an expertise, you see, you grab him.
Now, what are people as a whole mostly expert at loneliness?
The world is full of experts on loneliness.
It's something that everybody recognizes when he sees it.
So it's not so much that these people are misfits, it's that they're lonely.
And I think that that's the hope that I can throw into people the hardest.
But then on the other hand, a number of your stories, too, give the solution to that is some sort of love.
Uh-huh. That's right.
I would have said that love is probably the principal theme I find through all your work.
That's right. And isn't it the antithesis of loneliness?
I mean, it's the yin and the yang. It's the balancing principle to loneliness.
And the cure for loneliness is love.
Individual to individual, or individual in his relationship to the entire world.
Yeah, I would have said love in all its meanings, not necessarily individuals, but in all of its...
That's right.
Okay, one more brief question on that more than human book.
Do you think that we do have latent to ESP or PSY powers?
There's no question about it. I've always felt so.
And particularly so in the seven years I've been married to Jane because Jane is a psychic.
And she's now involved in the Metaphysical Center here in San Diego.
And she's learning and teaching both these whole courses on the alternative metaphysical subjects.
Rather than that, my recently attended a fascinating seminar at the Aslan Institute up on the coast here.
Oh, Lord, what a beautiful place that is.
The seminar was run by Dr. Lily, John Lily.
You've heard of him in connection with dolphins and the like.
And I'm at Goswami, who's a theoretical physicist from the University of Oregon.
And Arthur Young, who's a...
He's the man who invented the helicopter and so on.
And the general thrust of the thing was quantum mechanics.
And when quantum mechanics gets up into its higher level,
it approaches philosophy, metaphysics, and religion.
There's no question about it.
But it also deals with the potentialities of the human mind and of ESP and so on.
And we ran some experiments during that seminar on precognition and telepathy and so on.
There's rather breathtaking results.
You'll find quantum mechanics people generally.
If you go into the book section, which has to do with philosophy and quantum mechanics,
you'll find this melding coming along between these higher levels of science and philosophy.
And it always includes something about the untapped possibilities of the human mind.
This is a thesis to be totally fantastic anymore.
The psychic possibilities, so-called supernatural, is one of the better documented things.
There are documents going back 2,000 years which deal with it.
And we've all experienced it.
Sometimes we don't notice our own experiences, but we do.
And investigations of such things has passed lives and so on.
It's fascinating to get into.
You don't have to believe everything about it.
You can take a perfectly scientific attitude and simply sit around gathering data.
The thing is, you could gather the data you don't like as well as the data that you do like.
There's a paradigm there with flying saucers.
Excuse me.
Where people ask questions in the convention, do you believe in flying saucers?
Well, do I believe in unidentified flying objects?
Yeah.
And anybody with any observation has seen flying objects which he couldn't identify.
Do I believe they come from a certain planet or have people in there who have come to Earth
to straighten us out for our old problems because we can't sell them ourselves?
And so on.
No, I don't believe that.
I would sit and gather data to like a hardware and body so I can really know, you know,
precisely and exactly what these things are.
So I make no assumptions.
I just gather data.
But if something comes along which I prefer not to believe, if it's hard data, I'll believe it.
I won't believe it until it is hard data, however.
But you've got to keep your mind open for any facts that come in.
Or listen to any of the things that anybody says.
And just hold it in abeyance until it's either proved or disproved.
There's no sense in screaming about chariots from heaven.
And then screaming just as hard as that there are no chariots from heaven.
Just gather data quietly until you gather enough data about anything.
You'll find out what the truth is.
The only great crime in that area is to get data and then not tell anybody that you have it.
And the military is extremely guilty of that.
Right, okay.
I guess I would probably characterize you.
This is sort of another way of saying what we were just talking about as a romantic.
And I would point to say a story like Thunder and Roses is an example of that.
Yeah, that's a very interesting story.
That was written, you know, when the death was still settling over here in Oshima.
It's probably the first atomic doom story that was written after the bomb was dropped.
It was written in late 1945.
And I wrote that with considerable passion.
There wasn't anybody in the world who understood what had happened,
except the people in the science fiction fraternity,
and maybe one or two rather forward thinking scientists at Oak Ridge and in the state of Washington.
And for the rest of the world thought it was just another big bang.
But in science fiction there, John Campbell had been publishing
Atomic Power and Atomic War stories for 15 years before that.
And we all understood what had happened.
Every single person who had been writing or reading science fiction
understood precisely what had happened and what it meant to the world.
Now of course it's become very much in the forefront, but we all saw it coming.
Very bad, an ugly situation.
Yeah, that was a powerful story. I guess you get a lot of response about that one, don't you?
Yes, I do. And it's been repented a good many times.
As a matter of fact, Ben Bober was just about to publish it in Omni as a classic when he left.
And I don't know what the situation is for the story again, but his chances are it will show up there.
Yeah, and in relation to that too, you've written about a number of discoveries or events before they ever came about.
Has that ever been pointed out to you?
Time and again, last year a long section from one of my stories was the heading of an article
in the Institute for Electronic and Electrical Engineers in their journal.
And it had to do with the creation of a duplicated random.
That is, you have a random sequence and you duplicate that random elsewhere, which is a direct contradiction in terms.
But this happens to be just the core of a new development in satellite communications, particularly military satellite communications,
which can't be tapped. You can't tap a random communication unless, of course, you can know what that randomness is.
In the case it's not random anymore, but it's a duplicated random and essentially that's what's been developed.
That was, oh, 20 years before it had been accomplished.
I have an accuser of inventing Velcro, which is in one of my stories about 15 years before it appeared on the market,
the illuminated wristwatch with a readout within one of my stories.
The most amazing thing of all though was before Watson and Crick discovered the DNA, the structure of the DNA molecule,
I had a story about some people who were marooned on a planet and when they came out of there, they had all been frozen.
When they came out of their little frozen cocoons, they found that they were on a planet that was not on any of their star charts
and standing in the cabin with them was a religious symbol of a double spiral.
And the whole story had to do with evolution.
First was positivism. Each generation of these marooned people was really more primitive than the one before.
They got right down to the cell and then that cell began to revolve again into something else.
And the whole figure, the whole symbolism there was of a double spiral, a double helix.
And something that goes down to a base and continues to spiral back up again into something else.
And knowing behold, years later Crick and Watson discovered the structure of the DNA molecule which contains all this information.
Now where that kind of thing comes from, I just can't begin to tell you. But it has happened to me time and time and time again.
That story you're referring to is the Golden Helix, wasn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah, I was thinking also about, I guess it was one of your very first science fiction stories, the Ether Breather in 1939 where you get a picture of the importance, the public importance, the impact of television.
I didn't even know there was television then.
Yeah, television became widely public around 1948.
And I had already been writing for ten years then.
I started writing as a very very much of a youngster.
Do you recall how you assumed television was going to be so important or how that story came out?
Well, I was living in New York at the time and long around Rockefeller Center there was a whole lot in the radio and newspapers about television.
The first television broadcast was done in 1925 by some scientists at CBS.
And they used the scanning disk with a bunch of little holes on a spinning disk.
And the lights scanned up and down.
The holes were drilled in a very close spiral and the light scanned back and forth at the spine, put little spots of light on the screen.
And there was quite a battle between that system and the cathode ray tube.
And this cathode ray tube finally won out.
You'd have to have a spinning disk in your set too in the home and they'd have to be synchronized with what was being broadcast, which was the chief difficulty with it.
But this interesting thing that in that story I learned a great deal of everything I could possibly find out about television at the time.
And I realized the enormous difficulties back in white television was one thing, but color television was something else again.
It was such a hard nut to crack and so complexly a technological achievement that I put it 200 years ahead in the future.
And it turned out the first color sets came out about three years later.
So often as science fiction writers, way ahead of science, there were times when science jumps way ahead of science fiction writers.
The micro processor, for example, was hardly mentioned in any story ever until it suddenly appeared on people's wrists.
I mean that's one time when technology really got the jump on us.
I could kick myself for that too because way back in the early 40s I met a guy who told me about a German patent which had run out and was now public domain of a liquid crystal in which, if you pass the voltage to it,
the transparent crystal became opaque.
And he told me about that as a kind of laboratory phenomenon.
I could have taken that and run with it, but I didn't.
And that's the secret of your liquid crystal watch.
Okay, one of my favorite stories that you've written, I don't think it's one of your more characteristic ones, but it's one of your better knowns, is the microcosmic god.
Yeah, I'm not too fond of that story.
Not because the idea isn't unique, it is.
That was a brand new kind of an idea.
But because it was so badly written, it was the first science fiction story I wrote.
And it was so much that I did not know about writing.
And one of the most important things about people as a whole, and if you're going to write people well, is that nobody's all bad. Nobody's all good either.
But the heavy in there was the bank president, that he's cut out of 100% pure cardboard. He is so poorly written.
And that angers me every time I think of it.
If I were to write it today, he would be very dimensional, and there'd be some good things about him too.
And then you could believe in the idea itself, the little people under the dome,
which is so overwhelming that nobody else but me apparently knows how badly that story is written.
Well, the idea carries it so well that the characterisation just isn't noticed, I don't think.
That's right, yeah. This is called the devil principle.
You come up with something really bright enough, people don't notice the flaws. But I do.
Okay, listen, what about your horror fiction? Do you like to write horror stories?
Sometimes, yes. It's nice to give a...
They have an amazing impact on people sometimes.
Although nowadays I think they're being vastly overdone and white people are flocking to see all these limitations of the exorcist and so on.
I don't know, it's depressing, it really is.
And each one you see, of course, has less impact than the one before, and it's got to be more bloody and more gory and more horrible,
and more flash brains and buckets of gore and so on.
So it loses its impact, you've got overdoses and that stuff.
But there's certainly something in the titillation of horror.
I wrote one story, it was called Professor Teddy Bear.
Years later I went to a convention and the lady came up to me and she was all clothed.
She was going to pull out my eyes out, she was so furious for having written that story.
It seemed that when she read it, she didn't get to sleep for two weeks.
And in some peculiar way she blamed me for it, that is, as if I had personally written it, personally to upset her.
However, that kind of reaction is very rare.
Mostly people kind of enjoy it because basically they know they're safe in spite of the fact that you have them living in terror for a little while.
Yeah, that was a, I remember that story, but the one that impressed me the most is a very understated horror story and that would be Bianca's hands.
Oh yeah, now that has really struck down deep to some people.
And I couldn't find out why.
I think it's the understatement of it, it's so subtly done that when you think about it, it just becomes more horrible all the time.
Well, for one thing it's a love story, and very profoundly a love story.
And people don't like to associate love with the things that happen in that story, and yet there's what they call the libistote, the love death.
And essentially this kind of consternation, I think is something that on a very deep level that people do recognize that death and love have a great deal in common.
The image of Kali, you know, the goddess, the Hindu goddess with all the arms.
Kali is the goddess of death, but she's also the source. They're one and the same thing.
And the idea of the libistote, the love death, has been worked by all kinds of people from Richard Wagner, that on through, that love and death are the same thing, that the ending is also the beginning.
And people are gravitated to that, but it's down so deep that when they really begin to get a glimpse of it, they're terrified.
One lady read this story once and it horrified her just terribly. She happened to be a rabid sturgeon fan, and I met her at a convention, and I recorded that story for Cadman Records.
And it was for alternate worlds records, which is now in the possession of Cadman.
And she definitely wanted to buy the record and get my autograph on it, but on the other hand she couldn't bear the story.
And for once I had somebody who had been that profoundly affected, and I had a chance to cut and pin her wings for the wall and find out why.
And she said, well, you know why?
I said, no, like that. She said, no, I don't. Really, I don't. Tell me why it upsets you.
And she said, all those disembodied hands crawling all around, all around over the house.